DataFrames Missing Data Section (#286)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/dataframes_missing.md

## Missing Data {#sec:missing}

Let's dive into how to **handle missing values** in `DataFrames.jl`.
We'll cover **three main approaches for dealing with missing data**:

1. **filtering missing** values with `ismissing` and `dropmissing`
1. **filling or replacing missing** values with `coalesce`

> 1. **skipping over missing** values with `skipmissing`

Reviewer: 50% of the text in bold might be a bit much

First, we need a `DataFrame` filled  with missing values to showcase these approaches:

```jl
sco("""
df_missing = DataFrame(;
    name=[missing, "Sally", "Alice", "Hank"],
    age=[17, missing, 20, 19],
    grade_2020=[5.0, 1.0, missing, 4.0],
)
"""; process=without_caption_label)
```

> This is ther same `DataFrame` from @sec:dataframes but with some `missing` values added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the same `DataFrame` from @sec:dataframes but with some `missing` values added.
```

### `Missing` type {#sec:missing_type}

Some languages have several types to represent missing values.
One such example is R which uses `NA`, `NA_integer_`, `NA_real_`, `NA_character_`, and `NA_complex_`.

> **Julia**, on the contrary, has **only one**: `Missing`.

Reviewer 2: what about `NaN` and `nothing`?

Author: This is missing values, `NaN` and `Nothing` are other kinds of types. Shall we include a `NOTE` explaining those. I think that it would introduce more confusion than enlightenment here.

Reviewer 2: then, how different is the Julia NaN from the ones you mentioned for R?, maybe a note will be appropriate.

Author: The ones mentioned are `NA`s in R. Non-Available. This is how R represents missing. `NaN` is different in R.

Reviewer: Are you sure that those `NA` types are used by R base to represent missing values?

Author: Yes, I am.
https://stackoverflow.com/a/70472074

```jl
sco("typeof(missing)"; process=without_caption_label)
```

As you can see `missing` is an instance of the type `Missing`.

> **_NOTE:_**
> In the [Julia Style Guide](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/style-guide/),
> there's a guidance to use camel case for types and modules
> (see @sec:notation).

> The first thing we need to cover of the `missing` values is that they **propagate through several operations**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first thing we need to cover for `missing` values is that they **propagate through several operations**.
```

For example, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division:

```jl

> # addition # hide

Reviewer: The comments don't add much value

Author: Then, make `Books.jl` render the correct block :)

Reviewer: fair :rofl:

sco("missing + 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# subtraction # hide
sco("missing - 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# multiplication # hide
sco("missing * 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# division # hide
sco("missing / 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

> They also **propagate through equality and comparison operators**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They also propagate **through equality and comparison operators**:
```

```jl
# equal 1 # hide
sco("missing == 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# equal missing # hide
sco("missing == missing"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# higher 1 # hide
sco("missing > 1"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# higher missing # hide
sco("missing > missing"; process=without_caption_label)
```

That's why we need to be very cautious when comparing and testing equalities in the presence of `missing` values.

> **For equality testing use instead the `ismissing` function**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**For equality testing use the `ismissing` function instead**.
```

### Filtering Missing Values {#sec:missing_filter}

Most of the time we want to **remove missing values from our data**.

> Removing `missing`s can be done with two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removing `missing`s can be done in two ways:
```

1. **`dropmissing` function** applied to a whole `DataFrame` or a subset of its columns.
1. **`ismissing` function** applied to a filtering procedure (see @sec:filter_subset).

> The `dropmissing` function takes as first positional argument a `DataFrame` (like all `DataFrames.jl` functions),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dropmissing` function takes as first positional argument a `DataFrame`,
```
Counterexample is `filter`

> and as an optional second argument either a single column or vector of columns by which columns you'll want to remove the missing data from.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and as an optional second argument either a single column or a vector of columns by which you'll want to remove the missing data from.
```

By default, if you do not specify column(s), as the second positional argument,

> it will remove any observation (row) that have `missing` values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it will remove any observation (row) having `missing` values:
```

You can use negation `!` to use it both ways:

- `ismissing` to just keep the `missing` values.
- `!ismissing` to keep anything but the `missing` values

```jl
# no bang # hide
sco("filter(:name => ismissing, df_missing)"; process=without_caption_label)
```

```jl
# with bang # hide
sco("filter(:name => !ismissing, df_missing)"; process=without_caption_label)
```

### Filling or Replacing Missing Values {#sec:missing_filling}

A common data wrangling pattern is to **replace or fill missing values**.

Like R (and SQL), Julia has the `coalesce` function.
We often use it in a broadcasted way over an array to fill all `missing` values with a specific value.

Here's an example of a vector containing two `missing` values:

```jl
sco("""
coalesce.([missing, \"some value\", missing], \"zero\")
"""; process=without_caption_label)
```

You can see that `coalesce` replaces `missing` values with `"zero"`.

We can definitely use it in a transform procedure (@sec:transform):

```jl
# missing coalesce # hide
sco("""transform(df_missing, :name => ByRow(x -> coalesce(x, \"John Doe\")); renamecols=false)"""; process=without_caption_label)
```

### Skipping over Missing Values {#sec:missing_skip}

> As we've saw on @sec:groupby_combine, we can use `combine` to apply summarizing functions to data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we saw on @sec:groupby_combine, we can use `combine` to apply summarizing functions to data.
```

> However, as explained, **`missing` values propagates through most operations in Julia**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as explained, **`missing` values propagate through most operations in Julia**.
```

Suppose you want to calculate the mean of `:grade_2020` column in our `df_missing`:

```jl
# combine with missing # hide
sco("""combine(df_missing, :grade_2020 => mean)"""; process=without_caption_label)
```

You can skip missing values in any array or summarizing function by passing the `skipmissing` function:

```jl
# combine with skipmissing # hide
sco("""combine(df_missing, :grade_2020 => mean ∘ skipmissing )"""; process=without_caption_label)
```

> **_NOTE:_**
> We are using the function composition operator `∘` (which you can type with `\circ<TAB>`) to compose two functions into one.

> > It is just like how you probably learned in high school:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> It is just like the mathematical operator:
```
